# IEEE 2791 Object Schema

IEEE 2791 Object Schema is intended for use as part of IEEE 2791 Std., 
*Standard for Bioinformatics Computations and Analyses Generated by
High-Throughput Sequencing (HTS) to Facilitate Communication.*

IEEE Std 2791™-2020 normatively references Version 1.4 of ieee-2791-schema. 



## License

All source files (.json files) in this repository are subject to the
following copyright and licensing terms.

> Copyright 2020 IEEE 2791 Object Schema Authors
> 
> Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
> modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
> met:
> 
> * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
>   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
> 
> * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
>   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
>   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
> 
> * Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
>   contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
>   this software without specific prior written permission.
> 
> THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
> "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
> LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
> A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
> HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
> SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
> LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
> DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
> THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
> (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
> OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
> 
> SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause



See the LICENSE file distributed with this work for copyright and
licensing information, the AUTHORS file for a list of copyright
holders, and the CONTRIBUTORS file for the list of contributors.
